---
title: "Universal Apply Methods"
next-page: /scala3/reference/other-new-features/export
num: 37
type: section
previous-page: /scala3/reference/other-new-features/transparent-traits
---

<!-- THIS FILE HAS BEEN GENERATED BY SCALADOC PREPROCESSOR. NOTE THAT ANY CHANGES TO THIS FILE CAN BE OVERRIDEN IN THE FUTURE -->

Scala case classes generate apply methods, so that values of case classes can be created using simple
function application, without needing to write `new`.

Scala 3 generalizes this scheme to all concrete classes. Example:

<div class="snippet" ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >class StringBuilder(s: String):
</span><span id="1" class="" >  def this() = this(&quot;&quot;)
</span><span id="2" class="" >
</span><span id="3" class="" >StringBuilder(&quot;abc&quot;)  // old: new StringBuilder(&quot;abc&quot;)
</span><span id="4" class="" >StringBuilder()       // old: new StringBuilder()
</span></code></pre></div>

This works since a companion object with two `apply` methods
is generated together with the class. The object looks like this:

<div class="snippet" ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >object StringBuilder:
</span><span id="1" class="" >  inline def apply(s: String): StringBuilder = new StringBuilder(s)
</span><span id="2" class="" >  inline def apply(): StringBuilder = new StringBuilder()
</span></code></pre></div>

The synthetic object `StringBuilder` and its `apply` methods are called _constructor proxies_.
Constructor proxies are generated even for Java classes and classes coming from Scala 2.
The precise rules are as follows:

1. A constructor proxy companion object `object C` is created for a concrete class `C`,
   provided the class does not have already a companion, and there is also no other value
   or method named `C` defined or inherited in the scope where `C` is defined.

2. Constructor proxy `apply` methods are generated for a concrete class provided

   - the class has a companion object (which might have been generated in step 1), and
   - that companion object does not already define a member named `apply`.

   Each generated `apply` method forwards to one constructor of the class. It has the
   same type and value parameters as the constructor.

Constructor proxy companions cannot be used as values by themselves. A proxy companion object must
be selected with `apply` (or be applied to arguments, in which case the `apply` is implicitly
inserted).

Constructor proxies are also not allowed to shadow normal definitions. That is,
if an identifier resolves to a constructor proxy, and the same identifier is also
defined or imported in some other scope, an ambiguity is reported.

### Motivation

Leaving out `new` hides an implementation detail and makes code more pleasant to read. Even though
it requires a new rule, it will likely increase the perceived regularity of the language, since case
classes already provide function call creation syntax (and are often defined for this reason alone).
