---
title: "Optional Braces"
next-page: /scala3/reference/other-new-features/explicit-nulls
num: 47
type: section
previous-page: /scala3/reference/other-new-features/control-syntax
---

<!-- THIS FILE HAS BEEN GENERATED BY SCALADOC PREPROCESSOR. NOTE THAT ANY CHANGES TO THIS FILE CAN BE OVERRIDEN IN THE FUTURE -->

Scala 3 enforces some rules on indentation and allows some occurrences of braces `{...}` to be optional:

- First, some badly indented programs are flagged with warnings.
- Second, some occurrences of braces `{...}` are made optional. Generally, the rule
  is that adding a pair of optional braces will not change the meaning of a well-indented program.

These changes can be turned off with the compiler flag `-no-indent`.

### Indentation Rules

The compiler enforces two rules for well-indented programs, flagging violations as warnings.

1. In a brace-delimited region, no statement is allowed to start to the left
   of the first statement after the opening brace that starts a new line.

   This rule is helpful for finding missing closing braces. It prevents errors like:

   <div class="snippet" ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >if (x &lt; 0) {
   </span><span id="1" class="" >  println(1)
   </span><span id="2" class="" >  println(2)
   </span><span id="3" class="" >
   </span><span id="4" class="" >println(&quot;done&quot;)  // error: indented too far to the left
   </span></code></pre></div>2. If significant indentation is turned off (i.e. under Scala 2 mode or under `-no-indent`) and we are at the  start of an indented sub-part of an expression, and the indented part ends in a newline, the next statement must start at an indentation width less than the sub-part. This prevents errors where an opening brace was forgotten, as in

   <div class="snippet" ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >if (x &lt; 0)
   </span><span id="1" class="" >  println(1)
   </span><span id="2" class="" >  println(2)   // error: missing `{`
   </span></code></pre></div>

These rules still leave a lot of leeway how programs should be indented. For instance, they do not impose
any restrictions on indentation within expressions, nor do they require that all statements of an indentation block line up exactly.

The rules are generally helpful in pinpointing the root cause of errors related to missing opening or closing braces. These errors are often quite hard to diagnose, in particular in large programs.

### Optional Braces

The compiler will insert `<indent>` or `<outdent>`
tokens at certain line breaks. Grammatically, pairs of `<indent>` and `<outdent>` tokens have the same effect as pairs of braces `{` and `}`.

The algorithm makes use of a stack `IW` of previously encountered indentation widths. The stack initially holds a single element with a zero indentation width. The _current indentation width_ is the indentation width of the top of the stack.

There are two rules:

1. An `<indent>` is inserted at a line break, if

   - An indentation region can start at the current position in the source, and
   - the first token on the next line has an indentation width strictly greater
     than the current indentation width

   An indentation region can start

   - after the leading parameters of an `extension`, or

   - after a `with` in a given instance, or

   - after a ": at end of line" token (see below)

   - after one of the following tokens:

     ```
     =  =>  ?=>  <-  catch  do  else  finally  for
     if  match  return  then  throw  try  while  yield
     ```

   - after the closing `)` of a condition in an old-style `if` or `while`.

   - after the closing `)` or `}` of the enumerations of an old-style `for` loop without a `do`.

   If an `<indent>` is inserted, the indentation width of the token on the next line
   is pushed onto `IW`, which makes it the new current indentation width.

2. An `<outdent>` is inserted at a line break, if

   - the first token on the next line has an indentation width strictly less
     than the current indentation width, and
   - the last token on the previous line is not one of the following tokens
     which indicate that the previous statement continues:

     ```
     then  else  do  catch  finally  yield  match
     ```

   - if the first token on the next line is a
     [leading infix operator](../changed-features/operators.html).
     then its indentation width is less then the current indentation width,
     and it either matches a previous indentation width or is also less
     than the enclosing indentation width.

   If an `<outdent>` is inserted, the top element is popped from `IW`.
   If the indentation width of the token on the next line is still less than the new current indentation width, step (2) repeats. Therefore, several `<outdent>` tokens
   may be inserted in a row.

   The following two additional rules support parsing of legacy code with ad-hoc layout. They might be withdrawn in future language versions:

   - An `<outdent>` is also inserted if the next token following a statement sequence starting with an `<indent>` closes an indentation region, i.e. is one of `then`, `else`, `do`, `catch`, `finally`, `yield`, `}`, `)`, `]` or `case`.

   An `<outdent>` is finally inserted in front of a comma that follows a statement sequence starting with an `<indent>` if the indented region is itself enclosed in parentheses

It is an error if the indentation width of the token following an `<outdent>` does not match the indentation of some previous line in the enclosing indentation region. For instance, the following would be rejected.

<div class="snippet" ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >if x &lt; 0 then
</span><span id="1" class="" >    -x
</span><span id="2" class="" >  else   // error: `else` does not align correctly
</span><span id="3" class="" >    x
</span></code></pre></div>

Indentation tokens are only inserted in regions where newline statement separators are also inferred:
at the top-level, inside braces `{...}`, but not inside parentheses `(...)`, patterns or types.

**Note:** The rules for leading infix operators above are there to make sure that

<div class="snippet" ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >one
</span><span id="1" class="" >  + two.match
</span><span id="2" class="" >      case 1 =&gt; b
</span><span id="3" class="" >      case 2 =&gt; c
</span><span id="4" class="" >  + three
</span></code></pre></div>

is parsed as `one + (two.match ...) + three`. Also, that

<div class="snippet" ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >if x then
</span><span id="1" class="" >    a
</span><span id="2" class="" >  + b
</span><span id="3" class="" >  + c
</span><span id="4" class="" >else d
</span></code></pre></div>

is parsed as `if x then a + b + c else d`.

### Optional Braces Around Template Bodies

The Scala grammar uses the term _template body_ for the definitions of a class, trait, or object that are normally enclosed in braces. The braces around a template body can also be omitted by means of the following rule.

If at the point where a template body can start there is a `:` that occurs at the end
of a line, and that is followed by at least one indented statement, the recognized
token is changed from ":" to ": at end of line". The latter token is one of the tokens
that can start an indentation region. The Scala grammar is changed so an optional ": at end of line" is allowed in front of a template body.

Analogous rules apply for enum bodies and local packages containing nested definitions.

With these new rules, the following constructs are all valid:

<div class="snippet" ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >trait A:
</span><span id="1" class="" >  def f: Int
</span><span id="2" class="" >
</span><span id="3" class="" >class C(x: Int) extends A:
</span><span id="4" class="" >  def f = x
</span><span id="5" class="" >
</span><span id="6" class="" >object O:
</span><span id="7" class="" >  def f = 3
</span><span id="8" class="" >
</span><span id="9" class="" >enum Color:
</span><span id="10" class="" >  case Red, Green, Blue
</span><span id="11" class="" >
</span><span id="12" class="" >new A:
</span><span id="13" class="" >  def f = 3
</span><span id="14" class="" >
</span><span id="15" class="" >package p:
</span><span id="16" class="" >  def a = 1
</span><span id="17" class="" >
</span><span id="18" class="" >package q:
</span><span id="19" class="" >  def b = 2
</span></code></pre></div>

In each case, the `:` at the end of line can be replaced without change of meaning by a pair of braces that enclose the following indented definition(s).

The syntax changes allowing this are as follows:

```
Template    ::=  InheritClauses [colonEol] [TemplateBody]
EnumDef     ::=  id ClassConstr InheritClauses [colonEol] EnumBody
Packaging   ::=  ‘package’ QualId [nl | colonEol] ‘{’ TopStatSeq ‘}’
SimpleExpr  ::=  ‘new’ ConstrApp {‘with’ ConstrApp} [[colonEol] TemplateBody]
```

Here, `colonEol` stands for ": at end of line", as described above.
The lexical analyzer is modified so that a `:` at the end of a line
is reported as `colonEol` if the parser is at a point where a `colonEol` is
valid as next token.

### Spaces vs Tabs

Indentation prefixes can consist of spaces and/or tabs. Indentation widths are the indentation prefixes themselves, ordered by the string prefix relation. So, so for instance "2 tabs, followed by 4 spaces" is strictly less than "2 tabs, followed by 5 spaces", but "2 tabs, followed by 4 spaces" is incomparable to "6 tabs" or to "4 spaces, followed by 2 tabs". It is an error if the indentation width of some line is incomparable with the indentation width of the region that's current at that point. To avoid such errors, it is a good idea not to mix spaces and tabs in the same source file.

### Indentation and Braces

Indentation can be mixed freely with braces `{...}`, as well as brackets `[...]` and parentheses `(...)`. For interpreting indentation inside such regions, the following rules apply.

1. The assumed indentation width of a multiline region enclosed in braces is the
   indentation width of the first token that starts a new line after the opening brace.

2. The assumed indentation width of a multiline region inside brackets or parentheses is:

   - if the opening bracket or parenthesis is at the end of a line, the indentation width of token following it,
   - otherwise, the indentation width of the enclosing region.
3. On encountering a closing brace `}`, bracket `]` or parenthesis `)`, as many `<outdent>` tokens as necessary are inserted to close all open nested indentation regions.

For instance, consider:

<div class="snippet" ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >{
</span><span id="1" class="" >  val x = f(x: Int, y =&gt;
</span><span id="2" class="" >    x * (
</span><span id="3" class="" >      y + 1
</span><span id="4" class="" >    ) +
</span><span id="5" class="" >    (x +
</span><span id="6" class="" >    x)
</span><span id="7" class="" >  )
</span><span id="8" class="" >}
</span></code></pre></div>- Here, the indentation width of the region enclosed by the braces is 3 (i.e. the indentation width of the
  statement starting with `val`).
- The indentation width of the region in parentheses that follows `f` is also 3, since the opening
  parenthesis is not at the end of a line.
- The indentation width of the region in parentheses around `y + 1` is 9
  (i.e. the indentation width of `y + 1`).
- Finally, the indentation width of the last region in parentheses starting with `(x` is 6 (i.e. the indentation width of the indented region following the `=>`.

### Special Treatment of Case Clauses

The indentation rules for `match` expressions and `catch` clauses are refined as follows:

- An indentation region is opened after a `match` or `catch` also if the following `case`
  appears at the indentation width that's current for the `match` itself.
- In that case, the indentation region closes at the first token at that
  same indentation width that is not a `case`, or at any token with a smaller
  indentation width, whichever comes first.

The rules allow to write `match` expressions where cases are not indented themselves, as in the example below:

<div class="snippet" ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >x match
</span><span id="1" class="" >case 1 =&gt; print(&quot;I&quot;)
</span><span id="2" class="" >case 2 =&gt; print(&quot;II&quot;)
</span><span id="3" class="" >case 3 =&gt; print(&quot;III&quot;)
</span><span id="4" class="" >case 4 =&gt; print(&quot;IV&quot;)
</span><span id="5" class="" >case 5 =&gt; print(&quot;V&quot;)
</span><span id="6" class="" >
</span><span id="7" class="" >println(&quot;.&quot;)
</span></code></pre></div>

### The End Marker

Indentation-based syntax has many advantages over other conventions. But one possible problem is that it makes it hard to discern when a large indentation region ends, since there is no specific token that delineates the end. Braces are not much better since a brace by itself also contains no information about what region is closed.

To solve this problem, Scala 3 offers an optional `end` marker. Example:

<div class="snippet" ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >def largeMethod(...) =
</span><span id="1" class="" >  ...
</span><span id="2" class="" >  if ... then ...
</span><span id="3" class="" >  else
</span><span id="4" class="" >    ... // a large block
</span><span id="5" class="" >  end if
</span><span id="6" class="" >  ... // more code
</span><span id="7" class="" >end largeMethod
</span></code></pre></div>

An `end` marker consists of the identifier `end` and a follow-on specifier token that together constitute all the tokes of a line. Possible specifier tokens are
identifiers or one of the following keywords

<div class="snippet" ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >if   while    for    match    try    new    this    val   given
</span></code></pre></div>

End markers are allowed in statement sequences. The specifier token `s` of an end marker must correspond to the statement that precedes it. This means:

- If the statement defines a member `x` then `s` must be the same identifier `x`.
- If the statement defines a constructor then `s` must be `this`.
- If the statement defines an anonymous given, then `s` must be `given`.
- If the statement defines an anonymous extension, then `s` must be `extension`.
- If the statement defines an anonymous class, then `s` must be `new`.
- If the statement is a `val` definition binding a pattern, then `s` must be `val`.
- If the statement is a package clause that refers to package `p`, then `s` must be the same identifier `p`.
- If the statement is an `if`, `while`, `for`, `try`, or `match` statement, then `s` must be that same token.

For instance, the following end markers are all legal:

<div class="snippet" ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >package p1.p2:
</span><span id="1" class="" >
</span><span id="2" class="" >  abstract class C():
</span><span id="3" class="" >
</span><span id="4" class="" >    def this(x: Int) =
</span><span id="5" class="" >      this()
</span><span id="6" class="" >      if x &gt; 0 then
</span><span id="7" class="" >        val a :: b =
</span><span id="8" class="" >          x :: Nil
</span><span id="9" class="" >        end val
</span><span id="10" class="" >        var y =
</span><span id="11" class="" >          x
</span><span id="12" class="" >        end y
</span><span id="13" class="" >        while y &gt; 0 do
</span><span id="14" class="" >          println(y)
</span><span id="15" class="" >          y -= 1
</span><span id="16" class="" >        end while
</span><span id="17" class="" >        try
</span><span id="18" class="" >          x match
</span><span id="19" class="" >            case 0 =&gt; println(&quot;0&quot;)
</span><span id="20" class="" >            case _ =&gt;
</span><span id="21" class="" >          end match
</span><span id="22" class="" >        finally
</span><span id="23" class="" >          println(&quot;done&quot;)
</span><span id="24" class="" >        end try
</span><span id="25" class="" >      end if
</span><span id="26" class="" >    end this
</span><span id="27" class="" >
</span><span id="28" class="" >    def f: String
</span><span id="29" class="" >  end C
</span><span id="30" class="" >
</span><span id="31" class="" >  object C:
</span><span id="32" class="" >    given C =
</span><span id="33" class="" >      new C:
</span><span id="34" class="" >        def f = &quot;!&quot;
</span><span id="35" class="" >        end f
</span><span id="36" class="" >      end new
</span><span id="37" class="" >    end given
</span><span id="38" class="" >  end C
</span><span id="39" class="" >
</span><span id="40" class="" >  extension (x: C)
</span><span id="41" class="" >    def ff: String = x.f ++ x.f
</span><span id="42" class="" >  end extension
</span><span id="43" class="" >
</span><span id="44" class="" >end p2
</span></code></pre></div>

#### When to Use End Markers

It is recommended that `end` markers are used for code where the extent of an indentation region is not immediately apparent "at a glance". People will have different preferences what this means, but one can nevertheless give some guidelines that stem from experience. An end marker makes sense if

- the construct contains blank lines, or
- the construct is long, say 15-20 lines or more,
- the construct ends heavily indented, say 4 indentation levels or more.

If none of these criteria apply, it's often better to not use an end marker since the code will be just as clear and more concise. If there are several ending regions that satisfy one of the criteria above, we usually need an end marker only for the outermost closed region. So cascades of end markers as in the example above are usually better avoided.

#### Syntax

```
EndMarker         ::=  ‘end’ EndMarkerTag    -- when followed by EOL
EndMarkerTag      ::=  id | ‘if’ | ‘while’ | ‘for’ | ‘match’ | ‘try’
                    |  ‘new’ | ‘this’ | ‘given’ | ‘extension’ | ‘val’
BlockStat         ::=  ... | EndMarker
TemplateStat      ::=  ... | EndMarker
TopStat           ::=  ... | EndMarker
```

### Example

Here is a (somewhat meta-circular) example of code using indentation. It provides a concrete representation of indentation widths as defined above together with efficient operations for constructing and comparing indentation widths.

<div class="snippet" ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >enum IndentWidth:
</span><span id="1" class="" >  case Run(ch: Char, n: Int)
</span><span id="2" class="" >  case Conc(l: IndentWidth, r: Run)
</span><span id="3" class="" >
</span><span id="4" class="" >  def &lt;= (that: IndentWidth): Boolean = this match
</span><span id="5" class="" >    case Run(ch1, n1) =&gt;
</span><span id="6" class="" >      that match
</span><span id="7" class="" >        case Run(ch2, n2) =&gt; n1 &lt;= n2 &amp;&amp; (ch1 == ch2 || n1 == 0)
</span><span id="8" class="" >        case Conc(l, r)   =&gt; this &lt;= l
</span><span id="9" class="" >    case Conc(l1, r1) =&gt;
</span><span id="10" class="" >      that match
</span><span id="11" class="" >        case Conc(l2, r2) =&gt; l1 == l2 &amp;&amp; r1 &lt;= r2
</span><span id="12" class="" >        case _            =&gt; false
</span><span id="13" class="" >
</span><span id="14" class="" >  def &lt; (that: IndentWidth): Boolean =
</span><span id="15" class="" >    this &lt;= that &amp;&amp; !(that &lt;= this)
</span><span id="16" class="" >
</span><span id="17" class="" >  override def toString: String =
</span><span id="18" class="" >    this match
</span><span id="19" class="" >      case Run(ch, n) =&gt;
</span><span id="20" class="" >        val kind = ch match
</span><span id="21" class="" >          case &apos; &apos;  =&gt; &quot;space&quot;
</span><span id="22" class="" >          case &apos;\t&apos; =&gt; &quot;tab&quot;
</span><span id="23" class="" >          case _    =&gt; s&quot;&apos;$ch&apos;-character&quot;
</span><span id="24" class="" >        val suffix = if n == 1 then &quot;&quot; else &quot;s&quot;
</span><span id="25" class="" >        s&quot;$n $kind$suffix&quot;
</span><span id="26" class="" >      case Conc(l, r) =&gt;
</span><span id="27" class="" >        s&quot;$l, $r&quot;
</span><span id="28" class="" >
</span><span id="29" class="" >object IndentWidth:
</span><span id="30" class="" >  private inline val MaxCached = 40
</span><span id="31" class="" >
</span><span id="32" class="" >  private val spaces = IArray.tabulate(MaxCached + 1)(new Run(&apos; &apos;, _))
</span><span id="33" class="" >  private val tabs = IArray.tabulate(MaxCached + 1)(new Run(&apos;\t&apos;, _))
</span><span id="34" class="" >
</span><span id="35" class="" >  def Run(ch: Char, n: Int): Run =
</span><span id="36" class="" >    if n &lt;= MaxCached &amp;&amp; ch == &apos; &apos; then
</span><span id="37" class="" >      spaces(n)
</span><span id="38" class="" >    else if n &lt;= MaxCached &amp;&amp; ch == &apos;\t&apos; then
</span><span id="39" class="" >      tabs(n)
</span><span id="40" class="" >    else
</span><span id="41" class="" >      new Run(ch, n)
</span><span id="42" class="" >  end Run
</span><span id="43" class="" >
</span><span id="44" class="" >  val Zero = Run(&apos; &apos;, 0)
</span><span id="45" class="" >end IndentWidth
</span></code></pre></div>

### Settings and Rewrites

Significant indentation is enabled by default. It can be turned off by giving any of the options `-no-indent`, `-old-syntax` and `-language:Scala2`. If indentation is turned off, it is nevertheless checked that indentation conforms to the logical program structure as defined by braces. If that is not the case, the compiler issues a warning.

The Scala 3 compiler can rewrite source code to indented code and back.
When invoked with options `-rewrite -indent` it will rewrite braces to
indented regions where possible. When invoked with options `-rewrite -no-indent` it will rewrite in the reverse direction, inserting braces for indentation regions.
The `-indent` option only works on [new-style syntax](./control-syntax.html). So to go from old-style syntax to new-style indented code one has to invoke the compiler twice, first with options `-rewrite -new-syntax`, then again with options
`-rewrite -indent`. To go in the opposite direction, from indented code to old-style syntax, it's `-rewrite -no-indent`, followed by `-rewrite -old-syntax`.

### Variant: Indentation Marker `:`

Generally, the possible indentation regions coincide with those regions where braces `{...}` are also legal, no matter whether the braces enclose an expression or a set of definitions. There is one exception, though: Arguments to function can be enclosed in braces but they cannot be simply indented instead. Making indentation always significant for function arguments would be too restrictive and fragile.

To allow such arguments to be written without braces, a variant of the indentation scheme is implemented under language import

<div class="snippet" ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >import language.experimental.fewerBraces
</span></code></pre></div>

This variant is more contentious and less stable than the rest of the significant indentation scheme. In this variant, a colon `:` at the end of a line is also one of the possible tokens that opens an indentation region. Examples:

<div class="snippet" ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >times(10):
</span><span id="1" class="" >  println(&quot;ah&quot;)
</span><span id="2" class="" >  println(&quot;ha&quot;)
</span></code></pre></div>

or

<div class="snippet" ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >xs.map:
</span><span id="1" class="" >  x =&gt;
</span><span id="2" class="" >    val y = x - 1
</span><span id="3" class="" >    y * y
</span></code></pre></div>

The colon is usable not only for lambdas and by-name parameters, but
also even for ordinary parameters:

<div class="snippet" ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >credentials ++ :
</span><span id="1" class="" >  val file = Path.userHome / &quot;.credentials&quot;
</span><span id="2" class="" >  if file.exists
</span><span id="3" class="" >  then Seq(Credentials(file))
</span><span id="4" class="" >  else Seq()
</span></code></pre></div>How does this syntax variant work? Colons at the end of lines are their own token, distinct from normal `:`.
The Scala grammar is changed so that colons at end of lines are accepted at all points
where an opening brace enclosing an argument is legal. Special provisions are taken so that method result types can still use a colon on the end of a line, followed by the actual type on the next.
