---
title: "Safe Initialization"
next-page: /scala3/reference/other-new-features/type-test
num: 49
type: section
previous-page: /scala3/reference/other-new-features/explicit-nulls
---

<!-- THIS FILE HAS BEEN GENERATED BY SCALADOC PREPROCESSOR.
    The whole process of generation the docs can be found under this README: https://github.com/lampepfl/dotty/blob/master/docs/README.md
    The source file can be found here https://github.com/lampepfl/dotty/edit/master/docs/docs/reference/other-new-features/safe-initialization.md
    NOTE THAT ANY CHANGES TO THIS FILE WILL BE OVERRIDEN BY PREPROCESSOR.
-->

Scala 3 implements experimental safe initialization check, which can be enabled by the compiler option `-Ysafe-init`.

## A Quick Glance

To get a feel of how it works, we first show several examples below.

### Parent-Child Interaction

Given the following code snippet:

<div class="snippet" ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >abstract class AbstractFile:
</span><span id="1" class="" >  def name: String
</span><span id="2" class="" >  val extension: String = name.substring(4)
</span><span id="3" class="" >
</span><span id="4" class="" >class RemoteFile(url: String) extends AbstractFile:
</span><span id="5" class="" >  val localFile: String = s&quot;${url.##}.tmp&quot;  // error: usage of `localFile` before it&apos;s initialized
</span><span id="6" class="" >  def name: String = localFile
</span></code></pre></div>

The checker will report:

<div class="snippet" ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >-- Warning: tests/init/neg/AbstractFile.scala:7:4 ------------------------------
</span><span id="1" class="" >7 |	val localFile: String = s&quot;${url.##}.tmp&quot;  // error: usage of `localFile` before it&apos;s initialized
</span><span id="2" class="" >  |	    ^
</span><span id="3" class="" >  |    Access non-initialized field value localFile. Calling trace:
</span><span id="4" class="" >  |     -&gt; val extension: String = name.substring(4)	[ AbstractFile.scala:3 ]
</span><span id="5" class="" >  |      -&gt; def name: String = localFile            	[ AbstractFile.scala:8 ]
</span></code></pre></div>

### Inner-Outer Interaction

Given the code below:

<div class="snippet" ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >object Trees:
</span><span id="1" class="" >  class ValDef { counter += 1 }
</span><span id="2" class="" >  class EmptyValDef extends ValDef
</span><span id="3" class="" >  val theEmptyValDef = new EmptyValDef
</span><span id="4" class="" >  private var counter = 0  // error
</span></code></pre></div>

The checker will report:

<div class="snippet" ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >-- Warning: tests/init/neg/trees.scala:5:14 ------------------------------------
</span><span id="1" class="" >5 |  private var counter = 0  // error
</span><span id="2" class="" >  |              ^
</span><span id="3" class="" >  |             Access non-initialized field variable counter. Calling trace:
</span><span id="4" class="" >  |              -&gt; val theEmptyValDef = new EmptyValDef    [ trees.scala:4 ]
</span><span id="5" class="" >  |               -&gt; class EmptyValDef extends ValDef       [ trees.scala:3 ]
</span><span id="6" class="" >  |                -&gt; class ValDef { counter += 1 }	     [ trees.scala:2 ]
</span></code></pre></div>

### Functions

Given the code below:

<div class="snippet" ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >abstract class Parent:
</span><span id="1" class="" >  val f: () =&gt; String = () =&gt; this.message
</span><span id="2" class="" >  def message: String
</span><span id="3" class="" >
</span><span id="4" class="" >class Child extends Parent:
</span><span id="5" class="" >  val a = f()
</span><span id="6" class="" >  val b = &quot;hello&quot;           // error
</span><span id="7" class="" >  def message: String = b
</span></code></pre></div>

The checker reports:

<div class="snippet" ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >-- Warning: tests/init/neg/features-high-order.scala:7:6 -----------------------
</span><span id="1" class="" >7 |  val b = &quot;hello&quot;           // error
</span><span id="2" class="" >  |      ^
</span><span id="3" class="" >  |Access non-initialized field value b. Calling trace:
</span><span id="4" class="" >  | -&gt; val a = f()                              	[ features-high-order.scala:6 ]
</span><span id="5" class="" >  |   -&gt; val f: () =&gt; String = () =&gt; this.message	[ features-high-order.scala:2 ]
</span><span id="6" class="" >  |    -&gt; def message: String = b	                [ features-high-order.scala:8 ]
</span></code></pre></div>

## Design Goals

We establish the following design goals:

- __Sound__: checking always terminates, and is sound for common and reasonable usage (over-approximation)
- __Expressive__: support common and reasonable initialization patterns
- __Friendly__: simple rules, minimal syntactic overhead, informative error messages
- __Modular__: modular checking, no analysis beyond project boundary
- __Fast__: instant feedback
- __Simple__: no changes to core type system, explainable by a simple theory

By _reasonable usage_, we include the following use cases (but not restricted to them):

- Access fields on `this` and outer `this` during initialization
- Call methods on `this` and outer `this` during initialization
- Instantiate inner class and call methods on such instances during initialization
- Capture fields in functions

## Principles

To achieve the goals, we uphold three fundamental principles:
_stackability_, _monotonicity_ and _scopability_.

Stackability means that all fields of a class are initialized at the end of the
class body. Scala enforces this property in syntax by demanding that all fields
are initialized at the end of the primary constructor, except for the language
feature below:

<div class="snippet" ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >var x: T = _
</span></code></pre></div>

Control effects such as exceptions may break this property, as the
following example shows:

<div class="snippet" ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >class MyException(val b: B) extends Exception(&quot;&quot;)
</span><span id="1" class="" >class A:
</span><span id="2" class="" >  val b = try { new B } catch { case myEx: MyException =&gt; myEx.b }
</span><span id="3" class="" >  println(b.a)
</span><span id="4" class="" >
</span><span id="5" class="" >class B:
</span><span id="6" class="" >  throw new MyException(this)
</span><span id="7" class="" >  val a: Int = 1
</span></code></pre></div>

In the code above, the control effect teleport the uninitialized value
wrapped in an exception. In the implementation, we avoid the problem
by ensuring that the values that are thrown must be transitively initialized.

Monotonicity means that the initialization status of an object should
not go backward: initialized fields continue to be initialized, a
field points to an initialized object may not later point to an
object under initialization. As an example, the following code will be rejected:

<div class="snippet" ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >trait Reporter:
</span><span id="1" class="" >  def report(msg: String): Unit
</span><span id="2" class="" >
</span><span id="3" class="" >class FileReporter(ctx: Context) extends Reporter:
</span><span id="4" class="" >  ctx.typer.reporter = this                // ctx now reaches an uninitialized object
</span><span id="5" class="" >  val file: File = new File(&quot;report.txt&quot;)
</span><span id="6" class="" >  def report(msg: String) = file.write(msg)
</span></code></pre></div>

In the code above, suppose `ctx` points to a transitively initialized
object. Now the assignment at line 3 makes `this`, which is not fully
initialized, reachable from `ctx`. This makes field usage dangerous,
as it may indirectly reach uninitialized fields.

Monotonicity is based on a well-known technique called _heap monotonic
typestate_ to ensure soundness in the presence of aliasing
[1]. Roughly speaking, it means initialization state should not go backwards.

Scopability means that there are no side channels to access to partially constructed objects. Control effects like coroutines, delimited
control, resumable exceptions may break the property, as they can transport a
value upper in the stack (not in scope) to be reachable from the current scope.
Static fields can also serve as a teleport thus breaks this property.  In the
implementation, we need to enforce that teleported values are transitively
initialized.

The principles enable _local reasoning_ of initialization, which means:

> An initialized environment can only produce initialized values.

For example, if the arguments to an `new`-expression are transitively
initialized, so is the result. If the receiver and arguments in a method call
are transitively initialized, so is the result.

## Rules

With the established principles and design goals, following rules are imposed:

1. In an assignment `o.x = e`, the expression `e` may only point to transitively initialized objects.

   This is how monotonicity is enforced in the system. Note that in an
   initialization `val f: T = e`, the expression `e` may point to an object
   under initialization. This requires a distinction between mutation and
   initialization in order to enforce different rules. Scala
   has different syntax for them, it thus is not an issue.

2. Objects under initialization may not be passed as arguments to method calls.

   Escape of `this` in the constructor is commonly regarded as an anti-pattern.
   However, escape of `this` as constructor arguments are allowed, to support
   creation of cyclic data structures. The checker will ensure that the escaped
   non-initialized object is not used, i.e. calling methods or accessing fields
   on the escaped object is not allowed.

3. Local definitions may only refer to transitively initialized objects.

   It means that in a local definition `val x: T = e`, the expression `e` may
   only evaluate to transitively initialized objects. The same goes for local
   lazy variables and methods. This rule is again motivated for simplicity in
   reasoning about initialization: programmers may safely assume that all local
   definitions only point to transitively initialized objects.

## Modularity

The analysis takes the primary constructor of concrete classes as entry points.
It follows the constructors of super classes, which might be defined in another project.
The analysis takes advantage of TASTy for analyzing super classes defined in another project.

The crossing of project boundary raises a concern about modularity. It is
well-known in object-oriented programming that superclass and subclass are
tightly coupled. For example, adding a method in the superclass requires
recompiling the child class for checking safe overriding.

Initialization is no exception in this respect. The initialization of an object
essentially invovles close interaction between subclass and superclass. If the
superclass is defined in another project, the crossing of project boundary
cannot be avoided for soundness of the analysis.

Meanwhile, inheritance across project boundary has been under scrutiny and the
introduction of [open classes](./open-classes.html) mitigate the concern here.
For example, the initialization check could enforce that the constructors of
open classes may not contain method calls on `this` or introduce annotations as
a contract.

The feedback from the community on the topic is welcome.

## Back Doors

Occasionally you may want to suppress warnings reported by the
checker.  You can either write `e: @unchecked` to tell the checker to
skip checking for the expression `e`, or you may use the old trick:
mark some fields as lazy.

## Caveats

- The system cannot provide safety guarantee when extending Java or Scala 2 classes.
- Safe initialization of global objects is only partially checked.

## References

1. Fähndrich, M. and Leino, K.R.M., 2003, July. [_Heap monotonic typestates_](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/publication/heap-monotonic-typestate/). In International Workshop on Aliasing, Confinement and Ownership in object-oriented programming (IWACO).
2. Fengyun Liu, Ondřej Lhoták, Aggelos Biboudis, Paolo G. Giarrusso, and Martin Odersky. 2020. [_A type-and-effect system for object initialization_](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3428243). OOPSLA, 2020.

