---
title: "Macros"
next-page: /scala3/reference/metaprogramming/staging
num: 30
type: section
previous-page: /scala3/reference/metaprogramming/compiletime-ops
---

<!-- THIS FILE HAS BEEN GENERATED BY SCALADOC PREPROCESSOR.
    The whole process of generation the docs can be found under this README: https://github.com/lampepfl/dotty/blob/master/docs/README.md
    The source file can be found here https://github.com/lampepfl/dotty/edit/master/docs/docs/reference/metaprogramming/macros.md
    NOTE THAT ANY CHANGES TO THIS FILE WILL BE OVERRIDEN BY PREPROCESSOR.
-->

> When developing macros enable `-Xcheck-macros` scalac option flag to have extra runtime checks.

## Macros: Quotes and Splices

Macros are built on two well-known fundamental operations: quotation and splicing.
Quotation is expressed as `'{...}` for expressions and splicing is expressed as `${ ... }`.
Additionally, within a quote or a splice we can quote or splice identifiers directly (i.e. `'e` and `$e`).
Readers may notice the resemblance of the two aforementioned syntactic
schemes with the familiar string interpolation syntax.

<div class="snippet" scala-snippet ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >println(s&quot;Hello, $name, here is the result of 1 + 1 = ${1 + 1}&quot;)
</span></code></pre></div>

In string interpolation we _quoted_ a string and then we _spliced_ into it, two others. The first, `name`, is a reference to a value of type [`String`](https://scala-lang.org/api/3.x/scala/Predef$.html#String-0), and the second is an arithmetic expression that will be _evaluated_ followed by the splicing of its string representation.

Quotes and splices in this section allow us to treat code in a similar way,
effectively supporting macros. The entry point for macros is an inline method
with a top-level splice. We call it a top-level because it is the only occasion
where we encounter a splice outside a quote (consider as a quote the
compilation-unit at the call-site). For example, the code below presents an
`inline` method `assert` which calls at compile-time a method `assertImpl` with
a boolean expression tree as argument. `assertImpl` evaluates the expression and
prints it again in an error message if it evaluates to `false`.

<div class="snippet" scala-snippet ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >import scala.quoted.*
</span><span id="1" class="" >
</span><span id="2" class="" >inline def assert(inline expr: Boolean): Unit =
</span><span id="3" class="" >  ${ assertImpl(&apos;expr) }
</span><span id="4" class="" >
</span><span id="5" class="" >def assertImpl(expr: Expr[Boolean])(using Quotes) = &apos;{
</span><span id="6" class="" >  if !$expr then
</span><span id="7" class="" >    throw AssertionError(s&quot;failed assertion: ${${ showExpr(expr) }}&quot;)
</span><span id="8" class="" >}
</span><span id="9" class="" >
</span><span id="10" class="" >def showExpr(expr: Expr[Boolean])(using Quotes): Expr[String] =
</span><span id="11" class="" >  &apos;{ [actual implementation later in this document] }
</span></code></pre></div>

If `e` is an expression, then `'{e}` represents the typed
abstract syntax tree representing `e`. If `T` is a type, then `Type.of[T]`
represents the type structure representing `T`.  The precise
definitions of "typed abstract syntax tree" or "type-structure" do not
matter for now, the terms are used only to give some
intuition. Conversely, `${e}` evaluates the expression `e`, which must
yield a typed abstract syntax tree or type structure, and embeds the
result as an expression (respectively, type) in the enclosing program.

Quotations can have spliced parts in them; in this case the embedded
splices are evaluated and embedded as part of the formation of the
quotation.

Quotes and splices can also be applied directly to identifiers. An identifier
`$x` starting with a `$` that appears inside a quoted expression or type is treated as a
splice `${x}`. Analogously, an quoted identifier `'x` that appears inside a splice
is treated as a quote `'{x}`. See the Syntax section below for details.

Quotes and splices are duals of each other.
For arbitrary expressions `e` we have:

<div class="snippet" scala-snippet ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >${&apos;{e}} = e
</span><span id="1" class="" >&apos;{${e}} = e
</span></code></pre></div>

## Types for Quotations

The type signatures of quotes and splices can be described using
two fundamental types:

- `Expr[T]`: abstract syntax trees representing expressions of type `T`
- `Type[T]`: non erased representation of type `T`.

Quoting takes expressions of type `T` to expressions of type `Expr[T]`
and it takes types `T` to expressions of type `Type[T]`. Splicing
takes expressions of type `Expr[T]` to expressions of type `T` and it
takes expressions of type `Type[T]` to types `T`.

The two types can be defined in package [`scala.quoted`](https://scala-lang.org/api/3.x/scala/quoted.html) as follows:

<div class="snippet" scala-snippet ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >package scala.quoted
</span><span id="1" class="" >
</span><span id="2" class="" >sealed trait Expr[+T]
</span><span id="3" class="" >sealed trait Type[T]
</span></code></pre></div>

Both `Expr` and `Type` are abstract and sealed, so all constructors for
these types are provided by the system. One way to construct values of
these types is by quoting, the other is by type-specific lifting
operations that will be discussed later on.

## The Phase Consistency Principle

A fundamental *phase consistency principle* (PCP) regulates accesses
to free variables in quoted and spliced code:

- _For any free variable reference `x`, the number of quoted scopes and the number of spliced scopes between the reference to `x` and the definition of `x` must be equal_.

Here, `this`-references count as free variables. On the other
hand, we assume that all imports are fully expanded and that `_root_` is
not a free variable. So references to global definitions are
allowed everywhere.

The phase consistency principle can be motivated as follows: First,
suppose the result of a program `P` is some quoted text `'{ ... x
... }` that refers to a free variable `x` in `P`. This can be
represented only by referring to the original variable `x`. Hence, the
result of the program will need to persist the program state itself as
one of its parts. We don’t want to do this, hence this situation
should be made illegal. Dually, suppose a top-level part of a program
is a spliced text `${ ... x ... }` that refers to a free variable `x`
in `P`.  This would mean that we refer during _construction_ of `P` to
a value that is available only during _execution_ of `P`. This is of
course impossible and therefore needs to be ruled out.  Now, the
small-step evaluation of a program will reduce quotes and splices in
equal measure using the cancellation rules above. But it will neither
create nor remove quotes or splices individually. So the PCP ensures
that program elaboration will lead to neither of the two unwanted
situations described above.

In what concerns the range of features it covers, this form of macros introduces
a principled metaprogramming framework that is quite close to the MetaML family of
languages. One difference is that MetaML does not have an equivalent of the PCP -
quoted code in MetaML _can_ access variables in its immediately enclosing
environment, with some restrictions and caveats since such accesses involve
serialization. However, this does not constitute a fundamental gain in
expressiveness.

## From `Expr`s to Functions and Back

It is possible to convert any `Expr[T => R]` into `Expr[T] => Expr[R]` and back.
These conversions can be implemented as follows:

<div class="snippet" scala-snippet ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >def to[T: Type, R: Type](f: Expr[T] =&gt; Expr[R])(using Quotes): Expr[T =&gt; R] =
</span><span id="1" class="" >  &apos;{ (x: T) =&gt; ${ f(&apos;x) } }
</span><span id="2" class="" >
</span><span id="3" class="" >def from[T: Type, R: Type](f: Expr[T =&gt; R])(using Quotes): Expr[T] =&gt; Expr[R] =
</span><span id="4" class="" >  (x: Expr[T]) =&gt; &apos;{ $f($x) }
</span></code></pre></div>

Note how the fundamental phase consistency principle works in two
different directions here for `f` and `x`.  In the method `to`,  the reference to `f` is
legal because it is quoted, then spliced, whereas the reference to `x`
is legal because it is spliced, then quoted.

They can be used as follows:

<div class="snippet" scala-snippet ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >val f1: Expr[Int =&gt; String] =
</span><span id="1" class="" >  to((x: Expr[Int]) =&gt; &apos;{ $x.toString }) // &apos;{ (x: Int) =&gt; x.toString }
</span><span id="2" class="" >
</span><span id="3" class="" >val f2: Expr[Int] =&gt; Expr[String] =
</span><span id="4" class="" >  from(&apos;{ (x: Int) =&gt; x.toString }) // (x: Expr[Int]) =&gt; &apos;{ ((x: Int) =&gt; x.toString)($x) }
</span><span id="5" class="" >f2(&apos;{2}) // &apos;{ ((x: Int) =&gt; x.toString)(2) }
</span></code></pre></div>

One limitation of `from` is that it does not β-reduce when a lambda is called immediately, as evidenced in the code `{ ((x: Int) => x.toString)(2) }`.
In some cases we want to remove the lambda from the code, for this we provide the method `Expr.betaReduce` that turns a tree
describing a function into a function mapping trees to trees.

<div class="snippet" scala-snippet ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >object Expr:
</span><span id="1" class="" >  ...
</span><span id="2" class="" >  def betaReduce[...](...)(...): ... = ...
</span></code></pre></div>

The definition of `Expr.betaReduce(f)(x)` is assumed to be functionally the same as
`'{($f)($x)}`, however it should optimize this call by returning the
result of beta-reducing `f(x)` if `f` is a known lambda expression.
`Expr.betaReduce` distributes applications of `Expr` over function arrows:

<div class="snippet" scala-snippet ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >Expr.betaReduce(_): Expr[(T1, ..., Tn) =&gt; R] =&gt; ((Expr[T1], ..., Expr[Tn]) =&gt; Expr[R])
</span></code></pre></div>

## Lifting Types

Types are not directly affected by the phase consistency principle.
It is possible to use types defined at any level in any other level.
But, if a type is used in a subsequent stage it will need to be lifted to a `Type`.
Indeed, the definition of `to` above uses `T` in the next stage, there is a
quote but no splice between the parameter binding of `T` and its
usage. But the code can be rewritten by adding an explicit binding of a `Type[T]`:

<div class="snippet" scala-snippet ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >def to[T, R](f: Expr[T] =&gt; Expr[R])(using t: Type[T])(using Type[R], Quotes): Expr[T =&gt; R] =
</span><span id="1" class="" >  &apos;{ (x: t.Underlying) =&gt; ${ f(&apos;x) } }
</span></code></pre></div>

In this version of `to`, the type of `x` is now the result of
inserting the type `Type[T]` and selecting its `Underlying`.

To avoid clutter, the compiler converts any type reference to
a type `T` in subsequent phases to `summon[Type[T]].Underlying`.

And to avoid duplication it does it once per type, and creates
an alias for that type at the start of the quote.

For instance, the user-level definition of `to`:

<div class="snippet" scala-snippet ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >def to[T, R](f: Expr[T] =&gt; Expr[R])(using t: Type[T], r: Type[R])(using Quotes): Expr[T =&gt; R] =
</span><span id="1" class="" >  &apos;{ (x: T) =&gt; ${ f(&apos;x) } }
</span></code></pre></div>

would be rewritten to

<div class="snippet" scala-snippet ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >def to[T, R](f: Expr[T] =&gt; Expr[R])(using t: Type[T], r: Type[R])(using Quotes): Expr[T =&gt; R] =
</span><span id="1" class="" >  &apos;{
</span><span id="2" class="" >    type T = t.Underlying
</span><span id="3" class="" >    (x: T) =&gt; ${ f(&apos;x) }
</span><span id="4" class="" >  }
</span></code></pre></div>

The `summon` query succeeds because there is a given instance of
type `Type[T]` available (namely the given parameter corresponding
to the context bound `: Type`), and the reference to that value is
phase-correct. If that was not the case, the phase inconsistency for
`T` would be reported as an error.

## Lifting Expressions

Consider the following implementation of a staged interpreter that implements
a compiler through staging.

<div class="snippet" scala-snippet ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >import scala.quoted.*
</span><span id="1" class="" >
</span><span id="2" class="" >enum Exp:
</span><span id="3" class="" >  case Num(n: Int)
</span><span id="4" class="" >  case Plus(e1: Exp, e2: Exp)
</span><span id="5" class="" >  case Var(x: String)
</span><span id="6" class="" >  case Let(x: String, e: Exp, in: Exp)
</span><span id="7" class="" >
</span><span id="8" class="" >import Exp.*
</span></code></pre></div>

The interpreted language consists of numbers `Num`, addition `Plus`, and variables
`Var` which are bound by `Let`. Here are two sample expressions in the language:

<div class="snippet" scala-snippet ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >val exp = Plus(Plus(Num(2), Var(&quot;x&quot;)), Num(4))
</span><span id="1" class="" >val letExp = Let(&quot;x&quot;, Num(3), exp)
</span></code></pre></div>

Here’s a compiler that maps an expression given in the interpreted
language to quoted Scala code of type `Expr[Int]`.
The compiler takes an environment that maps variable names to Scala `Expr`s.

<div class="snippet" scala-snippet ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >import scala.quoted.*
</span><span id="1" class="" >
</span><span id="2" class="" >def compile(e: Exp, env: Map[String, Expr[Int]])(using Quotes): Expr[Int] =
</span><span id="3" class="" >  e match
</span><span id="4" class="" >    case Num(n) =&gt;
</span><span id="5" class="" >      Expr(n)
</span><span id="6" class="" >    case Plus(e1, e2) =&gt;
</span><span id="7" class="" >      &apos;{ ${ compile(e1, env) } + ${ compile(e2, env) } }
</span><span id="8" class="" >    case Var(x) =&gt;
</span><span id="9" class="" >      env(x)
</span><span id="10" class="" >    case Let(x, e, body) =&gt;
</span><span id="11" class="" >      &apos;{ val y = ${ compile(e, env) }; ${ compile(body, env + (x -&gt; &apos;y)) } }
</span></code></pre></div>

Running `compile(letExp, Map())` would yield the following Scala code:

<div class="snippet" scala-snippet ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >&apos;{ val y = 3; (2 + y) + 4 }
</span></code></pre></div>

The body of the first clause, `case Num(n) => Expr(n)`, looks suspicious. `n`
is declared as an `Int`, yet it is converted to an `Expr[Int]` with `Expr()`.
Shouldn’t `n` be quoted? In fact this would not
work since replacing `n` by `'n` in the clause would not be phase
correct.

The `Expr.apply` method is defined in package `quoted`:

<div class="snippet" scala-snippet ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >package quoted
</span><span id="1" class="" >
</span><span id="2" class="" >object Expr:
</span><span id="3" class="" >  ...
</span><span id="4" class="" >  def apply[T: ToExpr](x: T)(using Quotes): Expr[T] =
</span><span id="5" class="" >    summon[ToExpr[T]].toExpr(x)
</span></code></pre></div>

This method says that values of types implementing the `ToExpr` type class can be
converted to `Expr` values using `Expr.apply`.

Scala 3 comes with given instances of `ToExpr` for
several types including `Boolean`, `String`, and all primitive number
types. For example, `Int` values can be converted to `Expr[Int]`
values by wrapping the value in a `Literal` tree node. This makes use
of the underlying tree representation in the compiler for
efficiency. But the `ToExpr` instances are nevertheless not _magic_
in the sense that they could all be defined in a user program without
knowing anything about the representation of `Expr` trees. For
instance, here is a possible instance of `ToExpr[Boolean]`:

<div class="snippet" scala-snippet ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >given ToExpr[Boolean] with
</span><span id="1" class="" >  def toExpr(b: Boolean) =
</span><span id="2" class="" >    if b then &apos;{ true } else &apos;{ false }
</span></code></pre></div>

Once we can lift bits, we can work our way up. For instance, here is a
possible implementation of `ToExpr[Int]` that does not use the underlying
tree machinery:

<div class="snippet" scala-snippet ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >given ToExpr[Int] with
</span><span id="1" class="" >  def toExpr(n: Int) = n match
</span><span id="2" class="" >    case Int.MinValue    =&gt; &apos;{ Int.MinValue }
</span><span id="3" class="" >    case _ if n &lt; 0      =&gt; &apos;{ - ${ toExpr(-n) } }
</span><span id="4" class="" >    case 0               =&gt; &apos;{ 0 }
</span><span id="5" class="" >    case _ if n % 2 == 0 =&gt; &apos;{ ${ toExpr(n / 2) } * 2 }
</span><span id="6" class="" >    case _               =&gt; &apos;{ ${ toExpr(n / 2) } * 2 + 1 }
</span></code></pre></div>

Since `ToExpr` is a type class, its instances can be conditional. For example,
a `List` is liftable if its element type is:

<div class="snippet" scala-snippet ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >given [T: ToExpr : Type]: ToExpr[List[T]] with
</span><span id="1" class="" >  def toExpr(xs: List[T]) = xs match
</span><span id="2" class="" >    case head :: tail =&gt; &apos;{ ${ Expr(head) } :: ${ toExpr(tail) } }
</span><span id="3" class="" >    case Nil          =&gt; &apos;{ Nil: List[T] }
</span></code></pre></div>

In the end, `ToExpr` resembles very much a serialization
framework. Like the latter it can be derived systematically for all
collections, case classes and enums. Note also that the synthesis
of _type-tag_ values of type `Type[T]` is essentially the type-level
analogue of lifting.

Using lifting, we can now give the missing definition of `showExpr` in the introductory example:

<div class="snippet" scala-snippet ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >def showExpr[T](expr: Expr[T])(using Quotes): Expr[String] =
</span><span id="1" class="" >  val code: String = expr.show
</span><span id="2" class="" >  Expr(code)
</span></code></pre></div>

That is, the `showExpr` method converts its `Expr` argument to a string (`code`), and lifts
the result back to an `Expr[String]` using `Expr.apply`.

## Lifting Types

The previous section has shown that the metaprogramming framework has
to be able to take a type `T` and convert it to a type tree of type
`Type[T]` that can be reified. This means that all free variables of
the type tree refer to types and values defined in the current stage.

For a reference to a global class, this is easy: Just issue the fully
qualified name of the class. Members of reifiable types are handled by
just reifying the containing type together with the member name. But
what to do for references to type parameters or local type definitions
that are not defined in the current stage? Here, we cannot construct
the `Type[T]` tree directly, so we need to get it from a recursive
implicit search. For instance, to implement

<div class="snippet" scala-snippet ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >summon[Type[List[T]]]
</span></code></pre></div>

where `T` is not defined in the current stage, we construct the type constructor
of `List` applied to the splice of the result of searching for a given instance for `Type[T]`:

<div class="snippet" scala-snippet ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >Type.of[ List[ summon[Type[T]].Underlying ] ]
</span></code></pre></div>

This is exactly the algorithm that Scala 2 uses to search for type tags.
In fact Scala 2's type tag feature can be understood as a more ad-hoc version of
`quoted.Type`. As was the case for type tags, the implicit search for a `quoted.Type`
is handled by the compiler, using the algorithm sketched above.

## Relationship with `inline`

Seen by itself, principled metaprogramming looks more like a framework for
runtime metaprogramming than one for compile-time metaprogramming with macros.
But combined with Scala 3’s `inline` feature it can be turned into a compile-time
system. The idea is that macro elaboration can be understood as a combination of
a macro library and a quoted program. For instance, here’s the `assert` macro
again together with a program that calls `assert`.

<div class="snippet" scala-snippet ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >object Macros:
</span><span id="1" class="" >
</span><span id="2" class="" >  inline def assert(inline expr: Boolean): Unit =
</span><span id="3" class="" >    ${ assertImpl(&apos;expr) }
</span><span id="4" class="" >
</span><span id="5" class="" >  def assertImpl(expr: Expr[Boolean])(using Quotes) =
</span><span id="6" class="" >    val failMsg: Expr[String] = Expr(&quot;failed assertion: &quot; + expr.show)
</span><span id="7" class="" >    &apos;{ if !($expr) then throw new AssertionError($failMsg) }
</span><span id="8" class="" >
</span><span id="9" class="" >@main def program =
</span><span id="10" class="" >  val x = 1
</span><span id="11" class="" >  Macros.assert(x != 0)
</span></code></pre></div>

Inlining the `assert` function would give the following program:

<div class="snippet" scala-snippet ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >@main def program =
</span><span id="1" class="" >  val x = 1
</span><span id="2" class="" >  ${ Macros.assertImpl(&apos;{ x != 0}) }
</span></code></pre></div>

The example is only phase correct because `Macros` is a global value and
as such not subject to phase consistency checking. Conceptually that’s
a bit unsatisfactory. If the PCP is so fundamental, it should be
applicable without the global value exception. But in the example as
given this does not hold since both `assert` and `program` call
`assertImpl` with a splice but no quote.

However, one could argue that the example is really missing
an important aspect: The macro library has to be compiled in a phase
prior to the program using it, but in the code above, macro
and program are defined together. A more accurate view of
macros would be to have the user program be in a phase after the macro
definitions, reflecting the fact that macros have to be defined and
compiled before they are used. Hence, conceptually the program part
should be treated by the compiler as if it was quoted:

<div class="snippet" scala-snippet ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >@main def program = &apos;{
</span><span id="1" class="" >  val x = 1
</span><span id="2" class="" >  ${ Macros.assertImpl(&apos;{ x != 0 }) }
</span><span id="3" class="" >}
</span></code></pre></div>

If `program` is treated as a quoted expression, the call to
`Macro.assertImpl` becomes phase correct even if macro library and
program are conceptualized as local definitions.

But what about the call from `assert` to `assertImpl`? Here, we need a
tweak of the typing rules. An inline function such as `assert` that
contains a splice operation outside an enclosing quote is called a
_macro_. Macros are supposed to be expanded in a subsequent phase,
i.e. in a quoted context. Therefore, they are also type checked as if
they were in a quoted context. For instance, the definition of
`assert` is typechecked as if it appeared inside quotes.  This makes
the call from `assert` to `assertImpl` phase-correct, even if we
assume that both definitions are local.

The `inline` modifier is used to declare a `val` that is
either a constant or is a parameter that will be a constant when instantiated. This
aspect is also important for macro expansion.

To get values out of expressions containing constants `Expr` provides the method
`value` (or `valueOrError`). This will convert the `Expr[T]` into a `Some[T]` (or `T`) when the
expression contains value. Otherwise it will return `None` (or emit an error).
To avoid having incidental val bindings generated by the inlining of the `def`
it is recommended to use an inline parameter. To illustrate this, consider an
implementation of the `power` function that makes use of a statically known exponent:

<div class="snippet" scala-snippet ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >inline def power(x: Double, inline n: Int) = ${ powerCode(&apos;x, &apos;n) }
</span><span id="1" class="" >
</span><span id="2" class="" >private def powerCode(x: Expr[Double], n: Expr[Int])(using Quotes): Expr[Double] =
</span><span id="3" class="" >  n.value match
</span><span id="4" class="" >    case Some(m) =&gt; powerCode(x, m)
</span><span id="5" class="" >    case None =&gt; &apos;{ Math.pow($x, $n.toDouble) }
</span><span id="6" class="" >
</span><span id="7" class="" >private def powerCode(x: Expr[Double], n: Int)(using Quotes): Expr[Double] =
</span><span id="8" class="" >  if n == 0 then &apos;{ 1.0 }
</span><span id="9" class="" >  else if n == 1 then x
</span><span id="10" class="" >  else if n % 2 == 0 then &apos;{ val y = $x * $x; ${ powerCode(&apos;y, n / 2) } }
</span><span id="11" class="" >  else &apos;{ $x * ${ powerCode(x, n - 1) } }
</span></code></pre></div>

## Scope Extrusion

Quotes and splices are duals as far as the PCP is concerned. But there is an
additional restriction that needs to be imposed on splices to guarantee
soundness: code in splices must be free of side effects. The restriction
prevents code like this:

<div class="snippet" scala-snippet ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >var x: Expr[T] = ...
</span><span id="1" class="" >&apos;{ (y: T) =&gt; ${ x = &apos;y; 1 } }
</span></code></pre></div>

This code, if it was accepted, would _extrude_ a reference to a quoted variable
`y` from its scope. This would subsequently allow access to a variable outside the
scope where it is defined, which is likely problematic. The code is clearly
phase consistent, so we cannot use PCP to rule it out. Instead, we postulate a
future effect system that can guarantee that splices are pure. In the absence of
such a system we simply demand that spliced expressions are pure by convention,
and allow for undefined compiler behavior if they are not. This is analogous to
the status of pattern guards in Scala, which are also required, but not
verified, to be pure.

[Multi-Stage Programming](./staging.html) introduces one additional method where
you can expand code at runtime with a method `run`. There is also a problem with
that invocation of `run` in splices. Consider the following expression:

<div class="snippet" scala-snippet ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >&apos;{ (x: Int) =&gt; ${ run(&apos;x); 1 } }
</span></code></pre></div>

This is again phase correct, but will lead us into trouble. Indeed, evaluating
the splice will reduce the expression `run('x)` to `x`. But then the result

<div class="snippet" scala-snippet ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >&apos;{ (x: Int) =&gt; ${ x; 1 } }
</span></code></pre></div>

is no longer phase correct. To prevent this soundness hole it seems easiest to
classify `run` as a side-effecting operation. It would thus be prevented from
appearing in splices. In a base language with side effects we would have to do this
anyway: Since `run` runs arbitrary code it can always produce a side effect if
the code it runs produces one.

## Example Expansion

Assume we have two methods, one `map` that takes an `Expr[Array[T]]` and a
function `f` and one `sum` that performs a sum by delegating to `map`.

<div class="snippet" scala-snippet ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >object Macros:
</span><span id="1" class="" >
</span><span id="2" class="" >  def map[T](arr: Expr[Array[T]], f: Expr[T] =&gt; Expr[Unit])
</span><span id="3" class="" >            (using Type[T], Quotes): Expr[Unit] = &apos;{
</span><span id="4" class="" >    var i: Int = 0
</span><span id="5" class="" >    while i &lt; ($arr).length do
</span><span id="6" class="" >      val element: T = ($arr)(i)
</span><span id="7" class="" >      ${f(&apos;element)}
</span><span id="8" class="" >      i += 1
</span><span id="9" class="" >  }
</span><span id="10" class="" >
</span><span id="11" class="" >  def sum(arr: Expr[Array[Int]])(using Quotes): Expr[Int] = &apos;{
</span><span id="12" class="" >    var sum = 0
</span><span id="13" class="" >    ${ map(arr, x =&gt; &apos;{sum += $x}) }
</span><span id="14" class="" >    sum
</span><span id="15" class="" >  }
</span><span id="16" class="" >
</span><span id="17" class="" >  inline def sum_m(arr: Array[Int]): Int = ${sum(&apos;arr)}
</span><span id="18" class="" >
</span><span id="19" class="" >end Macros
</span></code></pre></div>

A call to `sum_m(Array(1,2,3))` will first inline `sum_m`:

<div class="snippet" scala-snippet ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >val arr: Array[Int] = Array.apply(1, [2,3 : Int]:Int*)
</span><span id="1" class="" >${_root_.Macros.sum(&apos;arr)}
</span></code></pre></div>

then it will splice `sum`:

<div class="snippet" scala-snippet ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >val arr: Array[Int] = Array.apply(1, [2,3 : Int]:Int*)
</span><span id="1" class="" >
</span><span id="2" class="" >var sum = 0
</span><span id="3" class="" >${ map(&apos;arr, x =&gt; &apos;{sum += $x}) }
</span><span id="4" class="" >sum
</span></code></pre></div>

then it will inline `map`:

<div class="snippet" scala-snippet ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >val arr: Array[Int] = Array.apply(1, [2,3 : Int]:Int*)
</span><span id="1" class="" >
</span><span id="2" class="" >var sum = 0
</span><span id="3" class="" >val f = x =&gt; &apos;{sum += $x}
</span><span id="4" class="" >${ _root_.Macros.map(&apos;arr, &apos;f)(Type.of[Int])}
</span><span id="5" class="" >sum
</span></code></pre></div>

then it will expand and splice inside quotes `map`:

<div class="snippet" scala-snippet ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >val arr: Array[Int] = Array.apply(1, [2,3 : Int]:Int*)
</span><span id="1" class="" >
</span><span id="2" class="" >var sum = 0
</span><span id="3" class="" >val f = x =&gt; &apos;{sum += $x}
</span><span id="4" class="" >var i: Int = 0
</span><span id="5" class="" >while i &lt; arr.length do
</span><span id="6" class="" >  val element: Int = (arr)(i)
</span><span id="7" class="" >  sum += element
</span><span id="8" class="" >  i += 1
</span><span id="9" class="" >sum
</span></code></pre></div>

Finally cleanups and dead code elimination:

<div class="snippet" scala-snippet ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >val arr: Array[Int] = Array.apply(1, [2,3 : Int]:Int*)
</span><span id="1" class="" >var sum = 0
</span><span id="2" class="" >var i: Int = 0
</span><span id="3" class="" >while i &lt; arr.length do
</span><span id="4" class="" >  val element: Int = arr(i)
</span><span id="5" class="" >  sum += element
</span><span id="6" class="" >  i += 1
</span><span id="7" class="" >sum
</span></code></pre></div>

## Find implicits within a macro

Similarly to the `summonFrom` construct, it is possible to make implicit search available
in a quote context. For this we simply provide `scala.quoted.Expr.summon`:

<div class="snippet" scala-snippet ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >import scala.collection.immutable.{ TreeSet, HashSet }
</span><span id="1" class="" >inline def setFor[T]: Set[T] = ${ setForExpr[T] }
</span><span id="2" class="" >
</span><span id="3" class="" >def setForExpr[T: Type](using Quotes): Expr[Set[T]] =
</span><span id="4" class="" >  Expr.summon[Ordering[T]] match
</span><span id="5" class="" >    case Some(ord) =&gt; &apos;{ new TreeSet[T]()($ord) }
</span><span id="6" class="" >    case _ =&gt; &apos;{ new HashSet[T] }
</span></code></pre></div>

## Relationship with Transparent Inline

[Inline](./inline.html) documents inlining. The code below introduces a transparent
inline method that can calculate either a value of type `Int` or a value of type
`String`.

<div class="snippet" scala-snippet ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >transparent inline def defaultOf(inline str: String) =
</span><span id="1" class="" >  ${ defaultOfImpl(&apos;str) }
</span><span id="2" class="" >
</span><span id="3" class="" >def defaultOfImpl(strExpr: Expr[String])(using Quotes): Expr[Any] =
</span><span id="4" class="" >  strExpr.valueOrError match
</span><span id="5" class="" >    case &quot;int&quot; =&gt; &apos;{1}
</span><span id="6" class="" >    case &quot;string&quot; =&gt; &apos;{&quot;a&quot;}
</span><span id="7" class="" >
</span><span id="8" class="" >// in a separate file
</span><span id="9" class="" >val a: Int = defaultOf(&quot;int&quot;)
</span><span id="10" class="" >val b: String = defaultOf(&quot;string&quot;)
</span></code></pre></div>

## Defining a macro and using it in a single project

It is possible to define macros and use them in the same project as long as the implementation
of the macros does not have run-time dependencies on code in the file where it is used.
It might still have compile-time dependencies on types and quoted code that refers to the use-site file.

To provide this functionality Scala 3 provides a transparent compilation mode where files that
try to expand a macro but fail because the macro has not been compiled yet are suspended.
If there are any suspended files when the compilation ends, the compiler will automatically restart
compilation of the suspended files using the output of the previous (partial) compilation as macro classpath.
In case all files are suspended due to cyclic dependencies the compilation will fail with an error.

## Pattern matching on quoted expressions

It is possible to deconstruct or extract values out of `Expr` using pattern matching.

`scala.quoted` contains objects that can help extracting values from `Expr`.

- `scala.quoted.Expr`/`scala.quoted.Exprs`: matches an expression of a value (or list of values) and returns the value (or list of values).
- `scala.quoted.Const`/`scala.quoted.Consts`: Same as `Expr`/`Exprs` but only works on primitive values.
- `scala.quoted.Varargs`: matches an explicit sequence of expressions and returns them. These sequences are useful to get individual `Expr[T]` out of a varargs expression of type `Expr[Seq[T]]`.

These could be used in the following way to optimize any call to `sum` that has statically known values.

<div class="snippet" scala-snippet ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >inline def sum(inline args: Int*): Int = ${ sumExpr(&apos;args) }
</span><span id="1" class="" >private def sumExpr(argsExpr: Expr[Seq[Int]])(using Quotes): Expr[Int] =
</span><span id="2" class="" >  argsExpr match
</span><span id="3" class="" >    case Varargs(args @ Exprs(argValues)) =&gt;
</span><span id="4" class="" >      // args is of type Seq[Expr[Int]]
</span><span id="5" class="" >      // argValues is of type Seq[Int]
</span><span id="6" class="" >      Expr(argValues.sum) // precompute result of sum
</span><span id="7" class="" >    case Varargs(argExprs) =&gt; // argExprs is of type Seq[Expr[Int]]
</span><span id="8" class="" >      val staticSum: Int = argExprs.map(_.value.getOrElse(0)).sum
</span><span id="9" class="" >      val dynamicSum: Seq[Expr[Int]] = argExprs.filter(_.value.isEmpty)
</span><span id="10" class="" >      dynamicSum.foldLeft(Expr(staticSum))((acc, arg) =&gt; &apos;{ $acc + $arg })
</span><span id="11" class="" >    case _ =&gt;
</span><span id="12" class="" >      &apos;{ $argsExpr.sum }
</span></code></pre></div>

### Quoted patterns

Quoted pattens allow deconstructing complex code that contains a precise structure, types or methods.
Patterns `'{ ... }` can be placed in any location where Scala expects a pattern.

For example

<div class="snippet" scala-snippet ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >optimize {
</span><span id="1" class="" >   sum(sum(1, a, 2), 3, b)
</span><span id="2" class="" >} // should be optimized to 6 + a + b
</span></code></pre></div><div class="snippet" scala-snippet ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >def sum(args: Int*): Int = args.sum
</span><span id="1" class="" >inline def optimize(inline arg: Int): Int = ${ optimizeExpr(&apos;arg) }
</span><span id="2" class="" >private def optimizeExpr(body: Expr[Int])(using Quotes): Expr[Int] =
</span><span id="3" class="" >  body match
</span><span id="4" class="" >    // Match a call to sum without any arguments
</span><span id="5" class="" >    case &apos;{ sum() } =&gt; Expr(0)
</span><span id="6" class="" >    // Match a call to sum with an argument $n of type Int.
</span><span id="7" class="" >    // n will be the Expr[Int] representing the argument.
</span><span id="8" class="" >    case &apos;{ sum($n) } =&gt; n
</span><span id="9" class="" >    // Match a call to sum and extracts all its args in an `Expr[Seq[Int]]`
</span><span id="10" class="" >    case &apos;{ sum(${Varargs(args)}: _*) } =&gt; sumExpr(args)
</span><span id="11" class="" >    case body =&gt; body
</span><span id="12" class="" >
</span><span id="13" class="" >private def sumExpr(args1: Seq[Expr[Int]])(using Quotes): Expr[Int] =
</span><span id="14" class="" >  def flatSumArgs(arg: Expr[Int]): Seq[Expr[Int]] = arg match
</span><span id="15" class="" >    case &apos;{ sum(${Varargs(subArgs)}: _*) } =&gt; subArgs.flatMap(flatSumArgs)
</span><span id="16" class="" >    case arg =&gt; Seq(arg)
</span><span id="17" class="" >  val args2 = args1.flatMap(flatSumArgs)
</span><span id="18" class="" >  val staticSum: Int = args2.map(_.value.getOrElse(0)).sum
</span><span id="19" class="" >  val dynamicSum: Seq[Expr[Int]] = args2.filter(_.value.isEmpty)
</span><span id="20" class="" >  dynamicSum.foldLeft(Expr(staticSum))((acc, arg) =&gt; &apos;{ $acc + $arg })
</span></code></pre></div>

### Recovering precise types using patterns

Sometimes it is necessary to get a more precise type for an expression. This can be achieved using the following pattern match.

<div class="snippet" scala-snippet ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >def f(expr: Expr[Any])(using Quotes) = expr match
</span><span id="1" class="" >  case &apos;{ $x: t } =&gt;
</span><span id="2" class="" >    // If the pattern match succeeds, then there is
</span><span id="3" class="" >    // some type `t` such that
</span><span id="4" class="" >    // - `x` is bound to a variable of type `Expr[t]`
</span><span id="5" class="" >    // - `t` is bound to a new type `t` and a given
</span><span id="6" class="" >    //   instance `Type[t]` is provided for it
</span><span id="7" class="" >    // That is, we have `x: Expr[t]` and `given Type[t]`,
</span><span id="8" class="" >    // for some (unknown) type `t`.
</span></code></pre></div>

This might be used to then perform an implicit search as in:

<div class="snippet" scala-snippet ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >extension (inline sc: StringContext)
</span><span id="1" class="" >  inline def showMe(inline args: Any*): String = ${ showMeExpr(&apos;sc, &apos;args) }
</span><span id="2" class="" >
</span><span id="3" class="" >private def showMeExpr(sc: Expr[StringContext], argsExpr: Expr[Seq[Any]])(using Quotes): Expr[String] =
</span><span id="4" class="" >  import quotes.reflect.report
</span><span id="5" class="" >  argsExpr match
</span><span id="6" class="" >    case Varargs(argExprs) =&gt;
</span><span id="7" class="" >      val argShowedExprs = argExprs.map {
</span><span id="8" class="" >        case &apos;{ $arg: tp } =&gt;
</span><span id="9" class="" >          Expr.summon[Show[tp]] match
</span><span id="10" class="" >            case Some(showExpr) =&gt;
</span><span id="11" class="" >              &apos;{ $showExpr.show($arg) }
</span><span id="12" class="" >            case None =&gt;
</span><span id="13" class="" >              report.error(s&quot;could not find implicit for ${Type.show[Show[tp]]}&quot;, arg); &apos;{???}
</span><span id="14" class="" >      }
</span><span id="15" class="" >      val newArgsExpr = Varargs(argShowedExprs)
</span><span id="16" class="" >      &apos;{ $sc.s($newArgsExpr: _*) }
</span><span id="17" class="" >    case _ =&gt;
</span><span id="18" class="" >      // `new StringContext(...).showMeExpr(args: _*)` not an explicit `showMeExpr&quot;...&quot;`
</span><span id="19" class="" >      report.error(s&quot;Args must be explicit&quot;, argsExpr)
</span><span id="20" class="" >      &apos;{???}
</span><span id="21" class="" >
</span><span id="22" class="" >trait Show[-T]:
</span><span id="23" class="" >  def show(x: T): String
</span><span id="24" class="" >
</span><span id="25" class="" >// in a different file
</span><span id="26" class="" >given Show[Boolean] with
</span><span id="27" class="" >  def show(b: Boolean) = &quot;boolean!&quot;
</span><span id="28" class="" >
</span><span id="29" class="" >println(showMe&quot;${true}&quot;)
</span></code></pre></div>

### Open code patterns

Quoted pattern matching also provides higher-order patterns to match open terms. If a quoted term contains a definition,
then the rest of the quote can refer to this definition.

<div class="snippet" scala-snippet ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >&apos;{
</span><span id="1" class="" >  val x: Int = 4
</span><span id="2" class="" >  x * x
</span><span id="3" class="" >}
</span></code></pre></div>

To match such a term we need to match the definition and the rest of the code, but we need to explicitly state that the rest of the code may refer to this definition.

<div class="snippet" scala-snippet ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >case &apos;{ val y: Int = $x; $body(y): Int } =&gt;
</span></code></pre></div>

Here `$x` will match any closed expression while `$body(y)` will match an expression that is closed under `y`. Then
the subexpression of type `Expr[Int]` is bound to `body` as an `Expr[Int => Int]`. The extra argument represents the references to `y`. Usually this expression is used in combination with `Expr.betaReduce` to replace the extra argument.

<div class="snippet" scala-snippet ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >inline def eval(inline e: Int): Int = ${ evalExpr(&apos;e) }
</span><span id="1" class="" >
</span><span id="2" class="" >private def evalExpr(e: Expr[Int])(using Quotes): Expr[Int] = e match
</span><span id="3" class="" >  case &apos;{ val y: Int = $x; $body(y): Int } =&gt;
</span><span id="4" class="" >    // body: Expr[Int =&gt; Int] where the argument represents
</span><span id="5" class="" >    // references to y
</span><span id="6" class="" >    evalExpr(Expr.betaReduce(&apos;{$body(${evalExpr(x)})}))
</span><span id="7" class="" >  case &apos;{ ($x: Int) * ($y: Int) } =&gt;
</span><span id="8" class="" >    (x.value, y.value) match
</span><span id="9" class="" >      case (Some(a), Some(b)) =&gt; Expr(a * b)
</span><span id="10" class="" >      case _ =&gt; e
</span><span id="11" class="" >  case _ =&gt; e
</span></code></pre></div><div class="snippet" scala-snippet ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >eval { // expands to the code: (16: Int)
</span><span id="1" class="" >  val x: Int = 4
</span><span id="2" class="" >  x * x
</span><span id="3" class="" >}
</span></code></pre></div>

We can also close over several bindings using `$b(a1, a2, ..., an)`.
To match an actual application we can use braces on the function part `${b}(a1, a2, ..., an)`.

## More details

[More details](./macros-spec.html)
