---
layout: singlepage-overview
title: "Right-Associative Extension Methods: Details"
scala3: true
---

<!-- THIS FILE HAS BEEN GENERATED BY SCALADOC PREPROCESSOR. NOTE THAT ANY CHANGES TO THIS FILE CAN BE OVERRIDEN IN THE FUTURE -->

The most general form of leading parameters of an extension method is as follows:

- A possibly empty list of using clauses `leadingUsing`
- A single parameter `extensionParam`
- A possibly empty list of using clauses `trailingUsing`

This is then followed by `def`, the method name, and possibly further parameters
`otherParams`. An example is:

<div class="snippet" ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >extension (using a: A, b: B)(using c: C)    // &lt;-- leadingUsing
</span><span id="1" class="" >            (x: X)                            // &lt;-- extensionParam
</span><span id="2" class="" >            (using d: D)                      // &lt;-- trailingUsing
</span><span id="3" class="" >    def +:: (y: Y)(using e: E)(z: Z)          // &lt;-- otherParams
</span></code></pre></div>

An extension method is treated as a right-associative operator
(as in [SLS ยง6.12.3](https://www.scala-lang.org/files/archive/spec/2.13/06-expressions.html#infix-operations))
if it has a name ending in `:` and is immediately followed by a
single parameter. In the example above, that parameter is `(y: Y)`.

The Scala compiler pre-processes a right-associative infix operation such as `x +: xs`
to `xs.+:(x)` if `x` is a pure expression or a call-by-name parameter and to `val y = x; xs.+:(y)` otherwise. This is necessary since a regular right-associative infix method
is defined in the class of its right operand. To make up for this swap,
the expansion of right-associative extension methods performs an analogous parameter swap. More precisely, if `otherParams` consists of a single parameter
`rightParam` followed by `remaining`, the total parameter sequence
of the extension method's expansion is:

```
leadingUsing  rightParam  trailingUsing  extensionParam  remaining
```

For instance, the `+::` method above would become

<div class="snippet" ><div class="buttons"></div><pre><code class="language-scala"><span id="0" class="" >&lt;extension&gt; def +:: (using a: A, b: B)(using c: C)
</span><span id="1" class="" >                      (y: Y)
</span><span id="2" class="" >                      (using d: D)
</span><span id="3" class="" >                      (x: X)
</span><span id="4" class="" >                      (using e: E)(z: Z)
</span></code></pre></div>

This expansion has to be kept in mind when writing right-associative extension
methods with inter-parameter dependencies.

An overall simpler design could be obtained if right-associative operators could _only_ be defined as extension methods, and would be disallowed as normal methods. In that case neither arguments nor parameters would have to be swapped. Future versions of Scala should strive to achieve this simplification.
